lessons/02.md, before:

# Lesson 02

* [Download the HTML file for this lesson](/lessons/02.html?raw=true)
* [View the HTML file for this lesson in your browser](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/cosmologicon/glprog/blob/master/lessons/02.html)
* [Previous lesson](/lessons/01.md)
* [Next lesson](/lessons/03.md)
* [Back to lesson listing](/lessons/README.md)

Shaders and programs
====================

A shader is a subprogram of a WebGL program. Two shaders - a vertex shader and a fragment shader -
are joined together to make a WebGL program. (Other OpenGL versions can have different setups, but
every WebGL program is exactly one vertex shader and one fragment shader.)

![flow diagram: shaders](/lessons/img/flow-diagram-shaders.png?raw=true "every WebGL program has one vertex shader and one fragment shader")

Vertex shaders generally handle geometry, and fragment shaders generally handle colors. The name
"shader" is a bit of a misnomer: shading is just one of many things that shaders handle. Don't worry
about how they work yet. We'll cover that in the next several lessons.

This lesson covers all the methods involved in WebGL program creation:

* `gl.createShader`: create the shaders.
* `gl.shaderSource`: set the shader source code.
* `gl.compileShader`: compile the shaders.
* `gl.createProgram`: create the program.
* `gl.attachShader`: attach the shaders to the program.
* `gl.linkProgram`: link the program with the attached shaders.

If you think this is needlessly complicated, you're right. It's like this because of how older
versions of OpenGL operated. You should feel free to use a function that takes care of the details.
But we'll cover them in this lesson.

Setting up the shaders
======================

Here's how to create a vertex shader object, set its source code, and compile it:

	var vshader = gl.createShader(gl.VERTEX_SHADER)
	gl.shaderSource(vshader, vsource)
	gl.compileShader(vshader)

`vshader` is a WebGL shader object. It doesn't have any useful methods. The only thing you ever do
with it is pass it to methods of `gl`. (This is generally how WebGL objects work. All you do with
them is pass them to methods of `gl`.) `vsource` is just a string that specifies the vertex shader
source code. You can create it any way that you like. One common method is to put it in a `script`
tag and read that tag's contents, which is what we'll do starting in Lesson 03.

The shader source code is written in a language called GLSL ES, which we'll cover in detail in
Lessons 05 through 07. At the very minimum, a vertex shader must have a `main` function of type
`void`, and set the value of the global variable `gl_Position`. Here's a minimal example that's not
very useful:

	void main() {
	    gl_Position = vec4(0.0);
	}

Typical shaders are, of course, much more complicated, as we'll see in future lessons.

Setting up the fragment shader is very similar, but you use the GLenum `gl.FRAGMENT_SHADER` with
`gl.createShader`. Fragment shaders are also written in GLSL ES, but they have some differences,
including their global variables. So for instance, you can't write to `gl_Position` within your
fragment shader source. Fragment shaders also require a `main` function. You're not required to set
any global variables within your fragment shader (though you generally will if you want to do
anything useful), so a minimal fragment shader is even shorter:

	void main() {
	}

Vertex and fragment shader objects are completely different kinds of objects. One can never be used
as the other.

Shader objects can be deleted with `gl.deleteShader`. This is not generally necessary or useful.

Setting up the program
======================

Again, a WebGL program consists of two shaders, a vertex shader and a fragment shader. Once you've
complied the shaders, you need to create the program, attach the shaders to the program, and link
the program:

	var prog = gl.createProgram()
	gl.attachShader(prog, vshader)
	gl.attachShader(prog, fshader)
	gl.linkProgram(prog)

Like the shader objects, program objects don't have any methods themselves.

It is occasionally useful to attach a shader to more than one program. This is perfectly valid. A
shader may be safely deleted with `gl.deleteShader` after it's attached to a program. Doing so won't
mess up the program. Again, though, there's not much use in doing this.

Once a program is linked, it's available to be used:

	gl.useProgram(prog)

This makes `prog` the currently active program. You can switch which program is currently active by
calling `gl.useProgram` on a different program object. When a program is currently active, you can
send data to it, and then run it by issuing a drawing command. Your game will probably have a few
different programs, and you'll switch between them as you draw your scene.

Program objects can be deleted with `gl.deleteProgram`. This is not generally necessary or useful.

Debugging
=========

Shaders are hard to write, especially at first, and even harder to debug. You should be very slow
and deliberate adding new features to your shader, because it's really hard to tell what's going on.

Fortunately, GLSL is very powerful. You can often express complex concepts with just a little code.
So your shaders probably don't need to be very long. You'll often add just one or two lines at a
time, then reload the page and make sure it worked.

Debugging is made more difficult by the fact that if shader compilation or program linking fails,
there's no error thrown. You must manually check that these steps succeed, and if not, you need to
manually retrieve the info log to see what went wrong. Here's an example of checking that
compilation of a vertex shader succeeded:

	if (!gl.getShaderParameter(vshader, gl.COMPILE_STATUS)) {
		throw "Error compiling vertex shader:\n" + gl.getShaderInfoLog(vshader)
	}

And here's an example of checking that program linking succeeded:

	if (!gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.LINK_STATUS)) {
		throw "Error linking program:\n" + gl.getProgramInfoLog(prog)
	}

You can also request the info logs even if everything went fine, but generally in that case, the
info logs will be blank.

There's also something called program validation. I haven't found this to be useful for debugging,
but I'm sure it must help sometimes. If all else fails, go ahead and try it:

	gl.validateProgram(prog)

After running this, check the program's info log, and see whether the validation was successful with
`gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.VALIDATE_STATUS)`.

`buildProgramFromScripts`
=========================

To summarize, here are the steps to build a WebGL program, assuming you have the source code for the
two shaders in `script` tags:

1. Create the program object
2. Read the vertex shader source code from a script tag
3. Create the vertex shader object
4. Load the source code into the vertex shader object
5. Compile the vertex shader
6. Check the vertex shader compilation status and throw an error (along with the info log) if
compilation fails
7. Attach the vertex shader to the program object
8. Repeat steps 2-7 with the fragment shader
9. Link the program
10. Check the program link status and throw an error (along with the info log) if linking fails

Like I said, that's all pretty tedious. Pretty much everyone uses a helper function to handle this
process, and I suggest you do too. After lesson 02, I'll be including a function
`buildProgramFromScripts`, in the html file. You can either use this one or one you wrote yourself,
or someone else's.

Getters used in this lesson
===========================

	// boolean: whether this is a WebGL program object
	gl.isProgram(prog)
	// boolean: whether this is a WebGL shader object
	gl.isShader(shader)
	// GLenum: gl.VERTEX_SHADER or gl.FRAGMENT_SHADER
	gl.getShaderParameter(shader, gl.SHADER_TYPE)
	// string: the shader's source code.
	gl.getShaderSource(shader)

	// boolean: whether the shader was successfully compiled
	gl.getShaderParameter(shader, gl.COMPILE_STATUS)
	// Number: the number of shaders attached to this program (0-2)
	gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.ATTACHED_SHADERS)
	// Array of objects: the shader objects attached to this program
	gl.getAttachedShaders(prog)
	// boolean: whether the program was successfully linked
	gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.LINK_STATUS)
	// boolean: whether the program was successfully validated
	gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.VALIDATE_STATUS)
	// boolean: whether the program was successfully deleted
	gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.DELETE_STATUS)

	// string: the shader's info log
	gl.getShaderInfoLog(vshader))
	// string: the program's info log
	gl.getProgramInfoLog(prog)

Exercises
=========

1. Try to change the shader source so that it no longer compiles. There are many possible ways to do
this.
1. Try to change the shader source so that it still compiles. There are many possible ways to do
this.
1. Create and link a second program that uses the same fragment shader object, but a different
vertex shader object.
1. What is the compiler error if you use the following for the fragment shader source?

	`"void main() { gl_FragColor = vec3(0.0); }"`

Hint: use `gl.getShaderInfoLog`.

Commit message:

Lesson 2 refactored to include the example of drawing 100 points.

lessons/02.md, after:

# Lesson 02

* [Download the HTML file for this lesson](/lessons/02.html?raw=true)
* [View the HTML file for this lesson in your browser](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/cosmologicon/glprog/blob/master/lessons/02.html)
* [Previous lesson](/lessons/01.md)
* [Next lesson](/lessons/03.md)
* [Back to lesson listing](/lessons/README.md)

Shaders and programs
====================

A shader is a subprogram of a WebGL program. Two shaders - a vertex shader and a fragment shader -
are joined together to make a WebGL program. (Other OpenGL versions can have different setups, but
every WebGL program is exactly one vertex shader and one fragment shader.)

![flow diagram: shaders](/lessons/img/flow-diagram-shaders.png?raw=true "every WebGL program has one vertex shader and one fragment shader")

Vertex shaders generally handle geometry, and fragment shaders generally handle colors. The name
"shader" is a bit of a misnomer: shading is just one of many things that shaders handle. Don't worry
about how they work yet. We'll cover that in the next several lessons.

This lesson covers all the methods involved in WebGL program creation:

* `gl.createShader`: create the shaders.
* `gl.shaderSource`: set the shader source code.
* `gl.compileShader`: compile the shaders.
* `gl.createProgram`: create the program.
* `gl.attachShader`: attach the shaders to the program.
* `gl.linkProgram`: link the program with the attached shaders.

If you think this is needlessly complicated, you're right. It's like this because of how older
versions of OpenGL operated. You should feel free to use a function that takes care of the details.
But we'll cover them in this lesson.

Setting up the shaders
======================

Here's how to create a vertex shader object, set its source code, and compile it:

	var vshader = gl.createShader(gl.VERTEX_SHADER)
	gl.shaderSource(vshader, vsource)
	gl.compileShader(vshader)

`vshader` is a WebGL shader object. It doesn't have any useful methods. The only thing you ever do
with it is pass it to methods of `gl`. (This is generally how WebGL objects work. All you do with
them is pass them to methods of `gl`.)

`vsource` is just a string that specifies the vertex shader source code. You can create it any way
that you like. In this lesson we cram it all on one line, but you can see how awkward that is. It's
obviously a terrible idea for any larger shaders. JavaScript doesn't have an easy way to make
multi-line strings, so the common method to define shader source code is to put it in a `script` tag
and read that tag's contents, which is what we'll do starting in Lesson 03.

The shader source code is written in a language called GLSL ES, which we'll cover in detail in
Lessons 05 through 07. At the very minimum, a vertex shader must have a `main` function of type
`void`, and set the value of the global variable `gl_Position`. Here's a minimal example that's not
very useful:

	void main() {
	    gl_Position = vec4(0.0);
	}

Typical shaders are, of course, much more complicated, as we'll see in future lessons. In this
lesson we also set the global variable `gl_PointSize` to draw points (which appear as squares).
For instance, a vertex shader that puts a 20px point at (x, y) = (0.5, 0.6) looks like this:

	void main() {
		gl_Position = vec4(0.5, 0.6, 0.0, 1.0);
		gl_PointSize = 20.0;
	}

We'll cover all the pieces of this shader in much more detail in Lesson 03.

Setting up the fragment shader is very similar, but you use the GLenum `gl.FRAGMENT_SHADER` with
`gl.createShader`. Fragment shaders are also written in GLSL ES, but they have some differences,
including their global variables. So for instance, you can't write to `gl_Position` within your
fragment shader source. Fragment shaders also require a `main` function. You're not required to set
any global variables within your fragment shader (though you generally will if you want to do
anything useful), so a minimal fragment shader is even shorter:

	void main() {
	}

You'll commonly set `gl_FragColor` within your fragment shader, and it uses the same rgba channels
ranging from 0 to 1 as `gl.clearColor` does. The fragment shader used in this lesson specifies the
color as yellow (this will also be covered in more detail in Lesson 03):

	void main() {
		gl_FragColor = vec4(1.0, 1.0, 0.0, 1.0);
	}

Vertex and fragment shader objects are completely different kinds of objects. One can never be used
as the other.

Shader objects can be deleted with `gl.deleteShader`. This is not generally necessary or useful.

Setting up the program
======================

Again, a WebGL program consists of two shaders, a vertex shader and a fragment shader. Once you've
complied the shaders, you need to create the program, attach the shaders to the program, and link
the program:

	var prog = gl.createProgram()
	gl.attachShader(prog, vshader)
	gl.attachShader(prog, fshader)
	gl.linkProgram(prog)

Like the shader objects, program objects don't have any methods themselves.

It is occasionally useful to attach a shader to more than one program. This is perfectly valid. A
shader may be safely deleted with `gl.deleteShader` after it's attached to a program. Doing so won't
mess up the program. Again, though, there's not much use in doing this.

Once a program is linked, it's available to be used:

	gl.useProgram(prog)

This makes `prog` the currently active program. You can switch which program is currently active by
calling `gl.useProgram` on a different program object. When a program is currently active, you can
send data to it, and then run it by issuing a drawing command. Your game will probably have a few
different programs, and you'll switch between them as you draw your scene.

Program objects can be deleted with `gl.deleteProgram`. This is not generally necessary or useful.

Debugging
=========

Shaders are hard to write, especially at first, and even harder to debug. You should be very slow
and deliberate adding new features to your shader, because it's really hard to tell what's going on.

Fortunately, GLSL is very powerful. You can often express complex concepts with just a little code.
So your shaders probably don't need to be very long. You'll often add just one or two lines at a
time, then reload the page and make sure it worked.

Debugging is made more difficult by the fact that if shader compilation or program linking fails,
there's no error thrown. You must manually check that these steps succeed, and if not, you need to
manually retrieve the info log to see what went wrong. Here's an example of checking that
compilation of a vertex shader succeeded:

	if (!gl.getShaderParameter(vshader, gl.COMPILE_STATUS)) {
		throw "Error compiling vertex shader:\n" + gl.getShaderInfoLog(vshader)
	}

And here's an example of checking that program linking succeeded:

	if (!gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.LINK_STATUS)) {
		throw "Error linking program:\n" + gl.getProgramInfoLog(prog)
	}

You can also request the info logs even if everything went fine, but generally in that case, the
info logs will be blank.

There's also something called program validation. I haven't found this to be useful for debugging,
but I'm sure it must help sometimes. If all else fails, go ahead and try it:

	gl.validateProgram(prog)

After running this, check the program's info log, and see whether the validation was successful with
`gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.VALIDATE_STATUS)`.

`buildProgramFromScripts`
=========================

To summarize, here are the steps to build a WebGL program, assuming you have the source code for the
two shaders in `script` tags:

1. Create the program object
2. Read the vertex shader source code from a script tag
3. Create the vertex shader object
4. Load the source code into the vertex shader object
5. Compile the vertex shader
6. Check the vertex shader compilation status and throw an error (along with the info log) if
compilation fails
7. Attach the vertex shader to the program object
8. Repeat steps 2-7 with the fragment shader
9. Link the program
10. Check the program link status and throw an error (along with the info log) if linking fails

Like I said, that's all pretty tedious. Pretty much everyone uses a helper function to handle this
process, and I suggest you do too. After lesson 02, I'll be including a function
`buildProgramFromScripts`, in the html file. You can either use this one or one you wrote yourself,
or someone else's.

Getters used in this lesson
===========================

	// boolean: whether this is a WebGL program object
	gl.isProgram(prog)
	// boolean: whether this is a WebGL shader object
	gl.isShader(shader)
	// GLenum: gl.VERTEX_SHADER or gl.FRAGMENT_SHADER
	gl.getShaderParameter(shader, gl.SHADER_TYPE)
	// string: the shader's source code.
	gl.getShaderSource(shader)

	// boolean: whether the shader was successfully compiled
	gl.getShaderParameter(shader, gl.COMPILE_STATUS)
	// Number: the number of shaders attached to this program (0-2)
	gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.ATTACHED_SHADERS)
	// Array of objects: the shader objects attached to this program
	gl.getAttachedShaders(prog)
	// boolean: whether the program was successfully linked
	gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.LINK_STATUS)
	// boolean: whether the program was successfully validated
	gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.VALIDATE_STATUS)
	// boolean: whether the program was successfully deleted
	gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.DELETE_STATUS)

	// string: the shader's info log
	gl.getShaderInfoLog(vshader))
	// string: the program's info log
	gl.getProgramInfoLog(prog)

Exercises
=========

1. Change the fragment shader source so that the 100 points drawn are red instead of yellow.
1. Create a second fragment shader that draws the points as white instead of yellow. When building
the program, alternate between which of the two fragment shaders get attached, so that points are
drawn alternating between yellow and white.
1. What is the compiler error if you use the following for the fragment shader source?

	`"void main() { gl_FragColor = vec3(0.0); }"`

Hint: use `gl.getShaderInfoLog`.
