lessons/03.md, before:

# Lesson 03

* [Download the HTML file for this lesson](/lessons/03.html?raw=true)
* [View the HTML file for this lesson in your browser](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/cosmologicon/glprog/blob/master/lessons/03.html)
* [Previous lesson](/lessons/02.md)
* [Next lesson](/lessons/04.md)
* [Back to lesson listing](/lessons/README.md)

Starting with this lesson, I'm putting the source code for the shaders into `script` tags. Again,
the shader source just needs to be a JavaScript string, and you can create it however you want, but
`script` tags are a very common way of doing so, since there's not really a great way of writing
multi-line strings in JavaScript. Another common way is to put the source code in a separate file,
which you read with `XMLHttpRequest`.

If you use the `script` tag method, you need to set the `type` attribute to something other than
`"text/javascript"`. Then your browser will skip over the `script` tag while processing the html, so
you can put whatever you want within it, without having it interpreted as JavaScript. Often the
`type` is set to `"x-shader/x-vertex"` for vertex shader source, and `"x-shader/x-fragment"` for
fragment shader source, but these values don't have any special meaning as far as JavaScript or
WebGL is concerned.

Running the program
===================

A WebGL program is run whenever you issue a drawing command. Despite the huge range that WebGL is
capable of, there are only two drawing commands, and they're quite similar: `gl.drawArrays` and
`gl.drawElements`. The only drawing command we're going to use until Lesson 11 is:

	gl.drawArrays(gl.POINTS, 0, 1)

This tells WebGL to draw a single point. Where it appears, how big it appears, and what color or
colors it is all depend on the shader source code.

First the vertex shader runs, in parallel, for each vertex. (Since we're only drawing one point,
there's nothing to parallelize here, but it will come up later.) The vertex shader assigns a value
to the global variable `gl_Position`, that determines where on the screen the point will appear. It
may also assign a value to `gl_PointSize`, which is the size of the point in pixels, and which
defaults to `1.0`.

Next the fragment shader runs, in parallel, for each fragment. As far as we're concerned, a fragment
is the same as a pixel. For every pixel that falls within the point, the fragment shader will
calculate and assign a value to `gl_FragColor`. This is the color that actually appears in the
viewport. If you draw a single point that's 10x10 pixels, the fragment shader will run 100 times in
parallel, and each run may produce a different color. This means you can have different colors for
different pixels within the same point, which we'll get to in Lesson 06.

![flow diagram: uniforms](/lessons/img/flow-diagram-uniforms.png?raw=true "shaders set the global variables gl_Position, gl_PointCoord, and gl_FragColor")

Shader uniforms
===============

Here's the vertex shader source for this lesson:

	uniform mediump float size;
	uniform highp vec2 pos;
	void main() {
		gl_Position = vec4(pos, 0.0, 1.0);
		gl_PointSize = size;
	}

We'll cover shader source code in a lot more detail in Lessons 05 through 07, but let's talk about
the basics.

The basic syntax is pretty similar to C, which is itself similar to JavaScript in a lot of ways.
Lines need to end in a semicolon, and there needs to be a `main` function of type `void` (meaning it
doesn't return anything). Variable types are strictly enforced. Unlike JavaScript, floating-point
numbers and integers are completely different types, and there's no automatic conversion between
them. So you can't use `0` for a function expecting a float. You need to use `float(0)` or `0.0`.

Here we see the first kind of shader variables: uniforms. Other kinds we'll encounter are constants,
attributes, and varyings. These kinds relate to where the variable value comes from, and whether
it's the same between different (parallel) shader invocations. The value of uniform variables can be
set from JavaScript. For the duration of a single drawing command, a uniform variable has a single
value.

The two uniforms declared here are `size`, which is a medium-precision floating point number, and
`pos`, which is a 2-element vector of high-precision floats. We'll cover different types in Lesson
05. The uniforms get set from JavaScript, but before going into that, let's try to understand this
shader source.

The assignment to `gl_PointSize` here is pretty straightforward. It just gets its value from the
uniform `size`. If `size` is `10.0`, then the size of the point drawn to the viewport will be 10
pixels, centered on the position determined by `gl_Position`.

Vector assigment
================

Let's look at the assignment to `gl_Position` again:

	gl_Position = vec4(pos, 0.0, 1.0);

This raises a lot of questions. First off, what's up with the syntax? What does
`vec4(pos, 0.0, 1.0)` mean? GLSL has really handy syntax for working with vectors, since vectors are
so commonly used. In this case `vec4` is a constructor for a 4-element vector, taking a 2-element
vector and two floats. Anything that would give you a total of four elements would work here.
Overall, the assignment line is equivalent to these four assigments:

	gl_Position[0] = pos[0];
	gl_Position[1] = pos[1];
	gl_Position[2] = 0.0;
	gl_Position[3] = 1.0;

Position vectors
================

The next question is, why does a position have 4 elements? Why not 3 or even 2? And what do the last
two elements represent?

The four components of a position vector are `x`, `y`, `z`, and `w`. The `x` and `y` coordinates of
`gl_Position` will determine the object's position on the screen. The `z` coordinate determines the
effective "depth" of the object. Using it effectively is a little tricky, though, and we'll cover
that in Lesson 04. Setting it to `0.0` for now is good enough.

The `w` coordinate is trickier. If vector math confuses you, just set it to `1.0` always and don't
worry about it. If you're interested in this sort of thing, though, read up on homogeneous
coordinates. Roughly speaking, the homogeneous coordinate (x, y, z, w) is equivalent to the
Euclidean coordinate (x/w, y/w, z/w), except that w can also be 0. Some calculations are easier in
homogeneous coordinates, which is why WebGL uses them. In particular, affine transformations on
homogeneous coordinates can be represented by matrices. I'm not going to be covering any advanced
usages of them, however. I'll almost always be setting `w` coordinates to `1.0`, and some things I
say about vectors will technically only be true if the `w` component is 1.

Clip space
==========

The final question is, what are the units of `gl_Position`? `gl_Position` uses clip space
coordinates. Clip space is a 3-dimensional coordinate system. From the point of view of someone
looking into the viewport (i.e. you), the clip space x-axis points to the right, the y-axis points
upward, and the z-axis points forward. (This means that clip space is a left-handed coordinate
system, which can occasionally cause confusion, since we usually work in right-handed coordinates.)

![clipspace coordinates](/lessons/img/clipspace-coordinates.png?raw=true "the x, y, and z axes of clipspace point right, up, and forward")

The x and y axes of clip space point in the same direction as the x and y axes of viewport
coordinates, so that's good. But the clip space origin is in the center of the viewport, not the
lower left. So whenever we convert between viewport and clip space coordinates, we'll need to take
this into account.

The units of clip space are also not in pixels. The all-important clip space region is a cube
running from (-1, -1, -1) to (1, 1, 1). Only vertices whose `gl_Position` are within this region
will be displayed in the viewport. For x and y, the range [-1, 1] gets mapped to the viewport width
and height. So (x, y) = (-1, -1) is the bottom left of the viewport, etc. The origin (x, y) = (0, 0)
is at the center of the viewport. So it makes sense for something falling outside the [-1, 1] range
not to be displayed - it wouldn't be on the viewport anyway. But it will also be clipped if the z
coordinate is outside the range. It's possible for something to be too close (z < -1) or too far
away (z > 1) to appear.

Generally you won't work in clip space within your game. You'll use some other coordinate system
that makes sense for you, and then map it to clip space within the vertex shader.

The fragment shader
===================

This looks pretty similar to the vertex shader. A uniform (a vector of 3 medium-precision floats in
this case) is used to assign a value to the global `gl_FragColor`:

	uniform mediump vec3 color;
	void main() {
		gl_FragColor = vec4(color, 1.0);
	}

Uniforms are shared between vertex and fragment shaders, meaning you can declare the same uniform in
both shaders and only set its value once in JavaScript. You only need to declare the uniform in the
shaders where it's used, so a uniform doesn't need to be declared in both shaders. But if it is, it
needs to have the same type in both shaders.

Like `gl_Position` and `gl_PointSize` in the vertex shader, the fragment shader can set a value to
the global variable `gl_FragColor`. It's a vector of 4 floats between `0.0` and `1.0`, which are the
red, green, blue, and alpha values of the pixel color produced in this fragment. This is equivalent
to the above shader code:

	gl_FragColor[0] = color[0];  // red
	gl_FragColor[1] = color[1];  // green
	gl_FragColor[2] = color[2];  // blue
	gl_FragColor[3] = 1.0;       // alpha

Setting shader uniforms
=======================

So now we know that this WebGL program has three uniforms, `size`, `pos`, and `color`, and their
values need to be set before the drawing command is issued. Let's go back to JavaScript now and see
how to set a uniform's value from the `gl` context and the `prog` program object. It would be nice
if you could just say:

	prog.pos = [0.5, 0]

But here's what you actually have to do:

	var pos = gl.getUniformLocation(prog, "pos")
	gl.uniform2f(pos, 0.5, 0)

The JavaScript variable `pos` in this case is a WebGL uniform location object, meaning it refers to
the location in the program's memory space where the uniform variable `pos` is stored, and in order
to set the value of `pos` you'll need to write to this location in memory. Like shader objects and
program objects, uniform location objects don't have any methods. Instead you pass them to one of
the uniform setter methods of `gl`.

The name of the setter method depends on the type of the uniform you're setting. `gl.uniform2f` is
the setter for `vec2`, a vector of 2 floats (hence the `2f`). The setter for `int` would be
`gl.uniform1i` (`1i` since you're setting 1 integer). There's always a number 1-4, followed by
either `i` or `f`, depending on whether it's an integer (or boolean or sampler) or a float.

There are also "vector" setters, which have `v` at the end of their names, and take Arrays instead
of separate arguments. These two lines are equivalent:

	gl.uniform2f(pos, 0.5, 0)
	gl.uniform2fv(pos, [0.5, 0])

Finally, WebGL has 2x2, 3x3, and 4x4 float matrix types. The uniform setters for these are only in
vector form, and they take an extra argument (transpose), which must always be set to `false`.

	// Setter for a 3x3 matrix uniform
	// rot is the uniform location for a 3x3 matrix uniform
	gl.uniformMatrix3fv(rot, false, [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])

Missing uniforms
================

One warning about something that always gets me. Shaders are highly optimized when they're compiled.
If a uniform is unused by the shader, it may be optimized away. For instance, say you're debugging
and you temporarily add a line to the end of the vertex shader in this lesson:

	uniform mediump float size;
	uniform highp vec2 pos;
	void main() {
		gl_Position = vec4(pos, 0.0, 1.0);
		gl_PointSize = size;
		gl_PointSize = 10.0;  // new line added for debugging
	}

Now all the points will be 10px in size, regardless of what the `size` uniform is set to, but will
anything else change? Possibly. The compiler may realize that the value of `size` does not affect
the output of the program, and optimize it away. It'll be as if its declaration doesn't even exist.
This means when you call `gl.getUniformLocation(prog, "size")` in JavaScript, you'll get `null`,
because no such uniform exists in the program. Depending on what you do with it, this may cause
problems in your JavaScript program. If you don't understand why your uniforms are apparently
missing from your WebGL program, it could be because they're not actually used.

Running the program
===================

Once you've set all the uniforms, it's time to actually draw something by calling the draw method:

	gl.drawArrays(gl.POINTS, 0, 1)

In this lesson, the draw method is called three times, once for each point. The uniforms are set to
different values before each call using the `gl.uniform*` setters.

At least in Chrome, you're going to get a warning when you do run this program:

	PERFORMANCE WARNING: Attribute 0 is disabled. This has signficant performance penalty 

Just ignore it. We'll learn to enable attributes in lesson 10. We're leaving them disabled now just
for learning purposes, and it's not hurting anything.

Getters used in this lesson
===========================

	// Number: number of uniforms in the program
	gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.ACTIVE_UNIFORMS)
	// WebGLActiveInfo object: info on the corresponding uniform
	// Has attributes name (string), type (gl enum), and size (1 for non-vectors)
	gl.getActiveUniform(prog, n)
	// WebGLUniformLocation object
	gl.getUniformLocation(prog, "uniform_name")
	// Value of the uniform at the given location
	gl.getUniform(prog, uniform_location)

Exercises
=========

1. Change the green point to blue.
1. Add another point in the lower left, 50px in size and colored white.
1. Change the vertex shader so that x and y coordinates of `gl_Position` are swapped. The green and
yellow points should then appear swapped in position.
1. Change the vertex shader so that all the points are shifted down by a small amount.
1. Change the fragment shader so that the blue component is always set to 0.5 regardless of the
`color` uniform.
1. Replace the `pos` uniform with two uniform floats, `posx` and `posy`, that can be set separately.
Update the uniform setters so the viewport appears the same as it did before.
1. Combine the `pos` and `size` uniforms into a single `vec3` uniform `posandsize`. Use
`posandsize[0]` and `posandsize[1]` to set the position and `posandsize[2]` to set the point size.
Update the uniform setters so the viewport appears the same as it did before.

Commit message:

Lesson 03 refactored to be a 2048 game

lessons/03.md, after:

# Lesson 03

* [Download the HTML file for this lesson](/lessons/03.html?raw=true)
* [View the HTML file for this lesson in your browser](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/cosmologicon/glprog/blob/master/lessons/03.html)
* [Previous lesson](/lessons/02.md)
* [Next lesson](/lessons/04.md)
* [Back to lesson listing](/lessons/README.md)

Starting with this lesson, I'm putting the source code for the shaders into `script` tags. Again,
the shader source just needs to be a JavaScript string, and you can create it however you want, but
`script` tags are a very common way of doing so, since there's not really a great way of writing
multi-line strings in JavaScript. Another common way is to put the source code in a separate file,
which you read with `XMLHttpRequest`.

If you use the `script` tag method, you need to set the `type` attribute to something other than
`"text/javascript"`. Then your browser will skip over the `script` tag while processing the html, so
you can put whatever you want within it, without having it interpreted as JavaScript. Often the
`type` is set to `"x-shader/x-vertex"` for vertex shader source, and `"x-shader/x-fragment"` for
fragment shader source, but these values don't have any special meaning as far as JavaScript or
WebGL is concerned.

Running the program
===================

A WebGL program is run whenever you issue a drawing command. Despite the huge range that WebGL is
capable of, there are only two drawing commands, and they're quite similar: `gl.drawArrays` and
`gl.drawElements`. The only drawing command we're going to use until Lesson 11 is:

	gl.drawArrays(gl.POINTS, 0, 1)

This tells WebGL to draw a single point. Where it appears, how big it appears, and what color or
colors it is all depend on the shader source code.

First the vertex shader runs, in parallel, for each vertex. (Since we're only drawing one point,
there's nothing to parallelize here, but it will come up later.) The vertex shader assigns a value
to the global variable `gl_Position`, that determines where on the screen the point will appear. It
may also assign a value to `gl_PointSize`, which is the size of the point in pixels, and which
defaults to `1.0`.

Next the fragment shader runs, in parallel, for each fragment. As far as we're concerned, a fragment
is the same as a pixel. For every pixel that falls within the point, the fragment shader will
calculate and assign a value to `gl_FragColor`. This is the color that actually appears in the
viewport. If you draw a single point that's 10x10 pixels, the fragment shader will run 100 times in
parallel, and each run may produce a different color. This means you can have different colors for
different pixels within the same point, which we'll get to in Lesson 06.

![flow diagram: uniforms](/lessons/img/flow-diagram-uniforms.png?raw=true "shaders set the global variables gl_Position, gl_PointCoord, and gl_FragColor")

Shader uniforms
===============

Here's the vertex shader source for this lesson:

	uniform mediump float size;
	uniform highp vec2 pos;
	void main() {
		gl_Position = vec4(pos, 0.0, 1.0);
		gl_PointSize = size;
	}

We'll cover shader source code in a lot more detail in Lessons 05 through 07, but let's talk about
the basics.

The basic syntax is pretty similar to C, which is itself similar to JavaScript in a lot of ways.
Lines need to end in a semicolon, and there needs to be a `main` function of type `void` (meaning it
doesn't return anything). Variable types are strictly enforced. Unlike JavaScript, floating-point
numbers and integers are completely different types, and there's no automatic conversion between
them. So you can't use `0` for a function expecting a float. You need to use `float(0)` or `0.0`.

Here we see the first kind of shader variables: uniforms. Other kinds we'll encounter are constants,
attributes, and varyings. These kinds relate to where the variable value comes from, and whether
it's the same between different (parallel) shader invocations. The value of uniform variables can be
set from JavaScript. For the duration of a single drawing command, a uniform variable has a single
value.

The two uniforms declared here are `size`, which is a medium-precision floating point number, and
`pos`, which is a 2-element vector of high-precision floats. We'll cover different types in
Lesson 05. The uniforms get set from JavaScript, but before going into that, let's try to understand
this shader source.

The assignment to `gl_PointSize` here is pretty straightforward. It just gets its value from the
uniform `size`. If `size` is `10.0`, then the size of the point drawn to the viewport will be 10
pixels, centered on the position determined by `gl_Position`.

Vector assigment
================

Let's look at the assignment to `gl_Position` again:

	gl_Position = vec4(pos, 0.0, 1.0);

This raises a lot of questions. First off, what's up with the syntax? What does
`vec4(pos, 0.0, 1.0)` mean? GLSL has really handy syntax for working with vectors, since vectors are
so commonly used. In this case `vec4` is a constructor for a 4-element vector, taking a 2-element
vector and two floats. Anything that would give you a total of four elements would work here.
Overall, the assignment line is equivalent to these four assigments:

	gl_Position[0] = pos[0];
	gl_Position[1] = pos[1];
	gl_Position[2] = 0.0;
	gl_Position[3] = 1.0;

Position vectors
================

The next question is, why does a position have 4 elements? Why not 3 or even 2? And what do the last
two elements represent?

The four components of a position vector are `x`, `y`, `z`, and `w`. The `x` and `y` coordinates of
`gl_Position` will determine the object's position on the screen. The `z` coordinate determines the
effective "depth" of the object. Using it effectively is a little tricky, though, and we'll cover
that in Lesson 04. Setting it to `0.0` for now is good enough.

The `w` coordinate is trickier. If vector math confuses you, just set it to `1.0` always and don't
worry about it. If you're interested in this sort of thing, though, read up on homogeneous
coordinates. Roughly speaking, the homogeneous coordinate (x, y, z, w) is equivalent to the
Euclidean coordinate (x/w, y/w, z/w), except that w can also be 0. Some calculations are easier in
homogeneous coordinates, which is why WebGL uses them. In particular, affine transformations on
homogeneous coordinates can be represented by matrices. I'm not going to be covering any advanced
usages of them, however. I'll almost always be setting `w` coordinates to `1.0`, and some things I
say about vectors will technically only be true if the `w` component is 1.

Clip space
==========

The final question is, what are the units of `gl_Position`? `gl_Position` uses clip space
coordinates. Clip space is a 3-dimensional coordinate system. From the point of view of someone
looking into the viewport (i.e. you), the clip space x-axis points to the right, the y-axis points
upward, and the z-axis points forward. (This means that clip space is a left-handed coordinate
system, which can occasionally cause confusion, since we usually work in right-handed coordinates.)

![clipspace coordinates](/lessons/img/clipspace-coordinates.png?raw=true "the x, y, and z axes of clipspace point right, up, and forward")

The x and y axes of clip space point in the same direction as the x and y axes of viewport
coordinates, so that's good. But the clip space origin is in the center of the viewport, not the
lower left. So whenever we convert between viewport and clip space coordinates, we'll need to take
this into account.

The units of clip space are also not in pixels. The all-important clip space region is a cube
running from (-1, -1, -1) to (1, 1, 1). Only vertices whose `gl_Position` are within this region
will be displayed in the viewport. For x and y, the range [-1, 1] gets mapped to the viewport width
and height. So (x, y) = (-1, -1) is the bottom left of the viewport, etc. The origin (x, y) = (0, 0)
is at the center of the viewport. So it makes sense for something falling outside the [-1, 1] range
not to be displayed - it wouldn't be on the viewport anyway. But it will also be clipped if the z
coordinate is outside the range. It's possible for something to be too close (z < -1) or too far
away (z > 1) to appear.

Generally you won't work in clip space within your game. You'll use some other coordinate system
that makes sense for you, and then map it to clip space within the vertex shader.

The fragment shader
===================

This looks pretty similar to the vertex shader. A uniform (a vector of 3 medium-precision floats in
this case) is used to assign a value to the global `gl_FragColor`:

	uniform mediump vec3 color;
	void main() {
		gl_FragColor = vec4(color, 1.0);
	}

Uniforms are shared between vertex and fragment shaders, meaning you can declare the same uniform in
both shaders and only set its value once in JavaScript. You only need to declare the uniform in the
shaders where it's used, so a uniform doesn't need to be declared in both shaders. But if it is, it
needs to have the same type in both shaders.

Like `gl_Position` and `gl_PointSize` in the vertex shader, the fragment shader can set a value to
the global variable `gl_FragColor`. It's a vector of 4 floats between `0.0` and `1.0`, which are the
red, green, blue, and alpha values of the pixel color produced in this fragment. This is equivalent
to the above shader code:

	gl_FragColor[0] = color[0];  // red
	gl_FragColor[1] = color[1];  // green
	gl_FragColor[2] = color[2];  // blue
	gl_FragColor[3] = 1.0;       // alpha

Setting shader uniforms
=======================

So now we know that this WebGL program has three uniforms, `size`, `pos`, and `color`, and their
values need to be set before the drawing command is issued. Let's go back to JavaScript now and see
how to set a uniform's value from the `gl` context and the `prog` program object. It would be nice
if you could just say:

	prog.pos = [0.5, 0]

But here's what you actually have to do:

	var pos = gl.getUniformLocation(prog, "pos")
	gl.uniform2f(pos, 0.5, 0)

The JavaScript variable `pos` in this case is a WebGL uniform location object, meaning it refers to
the location in the program's memory space where the uniform variable `pos` is stored, and in order
to set the value of `pos` you'll need to write to this location in memory. Like shader objects and
program objects, uniform location objects don't have any methods. Instead you pass them to one of
the uniform setter methods of `gl`.

The name of the setter method depends on the type of the uniform you're setting. `gl.uniform2f` is
the setter for `vec2`, a vector of 2 floats (hence the `2f`). The setter for `int` would be
`gl.uniform1i` (`1i` since you're setting 1 integer). There's always a number 1-4, followed by
either `i` or `f`, depending on whether it's an integer (or boolean or sampler) or a float.

There are also "vector" setters, which have `v` at the end of their names, and take Arrays instead
of separate arguments. These two lines are equivalent:

	gl.uniform2f(pos, 0.5, 0)
	gl.uniform2fv(pos, [0.5, 0])

Finally, WebGL has 2x2, 3x3, and 4x4 float matrix types. The uniform setters for these are only in
vector form, and they take an extra argument (transpose), which must always be set to `false`.

	// Setter for a 3x3 matrix uniform
	// rot is the uniform location for a 3x3 matrix uniform
	gl.uniformMatrix3fv(rot, false, [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])

Missing uniforms
================

One warning about something that always gets me. Shaders are highly optimized when they're compiled.
If a uniform is unused by the shader, it may be optimized away. For instance, say you're debugging
and you temporarily add a line to the end of the vertex shader in this lesson:

	uniform mediump float size;
	uniform highp vec2 pos;
	void main() {
		gl_Position = vec4(pos, 0.0, 1.0);
		gl_PointSize = size;
		gl_PointSize = 10.0;  // new line added for debugging
	}

Now all the points will be 10px in size, regardless of what the `size` uniform is set to, but will
anything else change? Possibly. The compiler may realize that the value of `size` does not affect
the output of the program, and optimize it away. It'll be as if its declaration doesn't even exist.
This means when you call `gl.getUniformLocation(prog, "size")` in JavaScript, you'll get `null`,
because no such uniform exists in the program. Depending on what you do with it, this may cause
problems in your JavaScript program. If you don't understand why your uniforms are apparently
missing from your WebGL program, it could be because they're not actually used.

Running the program
===================

Once you've set all the uniforms, it's time to actually draw something by calling the draw method:

	gl.drawArrays(gl.POINTS, 0, 1)

In this lesson, the draw method is called 16 times, once for each of the dark brown squares in the
grid, followed by one call for each tile that appears on screen. The uniforms are set to different
values using the `gl.uniform*` setters.

At least in Chrome, you're going to get a warning when you run this program:

	PERFORMANCE WARNING: Attribute 0 is disabled. This has signficant performance penalty 

Just ignore it. We'll learn to enable attributes in lesson 10. We're leaving them disabled now just
for educational purposes, and it's not hurting anything.

Getters used in this lesson
===========================

	// Number: number of uniforms in the program
	gl.getProgramParameter(prog, gl.ACTIVE_UNIFORMS)
	// WebGLActiveInfo object: info on the corresponding uniform
	// Has attributes name (string), type (gl enum), and size (1 for non-vectors)
	gl.getActiveUniform(prog, n)
	// WebGLUniformLocation object
	gl.getUniformLocation(prog, "uniform_name")
	// Value of the uniform at the given location
	gl.getUniform(prog, uniform_location)

Exercises
=========

1. Change the dark brown squares to gray.
1. Change the vertex shader so that x and y coordinates of `gl_Position` are swapped. When you play
the game, right should be swapped with up, and down should be swapped with left.
1. Change the fragment shader so that colors appear darker than normal. (Hint: you can multiply
colors by a number between 0 and 1 to darken them.)
1. Put a 40x40 black square in the center.
1. What's the largest you can make a single point? Can you make a single square that covers the
entire viewport? (This depends on your system.)
1. Replace the `pos` uniform with two uniform floats, `posx` and `posy`, that can be set separately.
Update the uniform setters so the viewport appears the same as it did before.
1. Combine the `pos` and `size` uniforms into a single `vec3` uniform `posandsize`. Use
`posandsize[0]` and `posandsize[1]` to set the position and `posandsize[2]` to set the point size.
Update the uniform setters so the viewport appears the same as it did before.
