# Lesson 06

* [Download the HTML file for this lesson](/lessons/06.html?raw=true)
* [View the HTML file for this lesson in your browser](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/cosmologicon/glprog/blob/master/lessons/06.html)
* [Previous lesson](/lessons/05.md)
* [Next lesson](/lessons/07.md)
* [Back to lesson listing](/lessons/README.md)

This lesson continues building the scene from Lesson 05. In this lesson we'll start to move things
around in 3 dimensions, and use a feature of the fragment shader to draw circles instead of squares.

## Built-in functions

GLSL has a bunch of handy built-in functions, useful for the kinds of things that you do in shaders
all the time. This section contains a complete list, but of course you don't need to memorize them.

The following functions behave exactly like their `Math` counterparts in JavaScript:

	sin cos tan pow exp log sqrt abs floor ceil min max sign

Also `atan` is equivalent to JavaScript's `Math.atan2`, and `mod` is equivalent to JavaScript's `%`
operator. The following are additional useful math functions:

	degrees radians asin acos log2 inversesqrt fract

The following functions are convenient ways to handle values over a range. One of my favorites is
`clamp(x, a, b)`, which restricts the value of `x` to the range `[a, b]`. It's equivalent to the
JavaScript `x > a ? a : x < b ? b : x`, or `Math.min(Math.max(x, a), b)`:

	clamp mix step smoothstep

The following functions are for vectors operations. For instance `dot(a, b)` is the vector dot
product of the vectors `a` and `b`:

	length distance dot cross normalize faceforward reflect refract

The following are for component-wise operations on matrices and vectors. They don't come up as much.
`any` and `all` are similar to JavaScript's `Array.some` and `Array.every`, but not really as
useful:

	matrixCompMult lessThan lessThanEqual greaterThan greaterThanEqual equal notEqual any all not

Finally there are texture lookup functions, which we'll cover starting in lesson 08:

	texture2D texture2DProj texture2DLod texture2DProjLod
	textureCube textureCubeLod

## Rotation matrices

Matrix types are only available for floats (no integer or binary matrices). They have constructors
that take 4, 9, or 16 values, like vector types whose constructors take 2, 3, or 4 values. The
matrix gets filled top to bottom and left to right:

	mat3 m = mat3(1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0, 7.0, 8.0, 9.0);

You can also treat matrices as arrays of vectors (`mat2` is a length-2 array of `vec2`s, etc.). Each
element corresponds to a column of the matrix.

	m[0] = vec3(6.0, 7.0, 8.0);  // set the first column of m
	m[1][0] = 9.0;  // set the first element of the second column
	m[2].x = 10.0;  // set the first element of the third column

This column-major order (select the column first, then the row) is the opposite of standard
mathematical notation, which is row-major order.




In Lesson 05, we saw some coordinate transformations, and now we'll see another kind, rotating the
coordinate system, and for that we'll use a transformation matrix. When you multiply a vector by a
transformation matrix, you transform that vector into a different coordinate system. There are
matrices for all affine transformations, including translation (shifting), rotation, stretching and
shrinking, and a few other things.

I'll stick to 2 dimensions to keep things simple for now. To rotate a vector by an angle theta in 2
dimensions, multiply by the vector by the 2-d rotation matrix:

	[ cos(theta)  sin(theta) ]
	[-sin(theta)  cos(theta) ]

This matrix is represented in GLSL with the type `mat2`:

	mat2(cos(theta), sin(theta), -sin(theta), cos(theta))

We're going to apply two rotations. First, rotate around the y (vertical) axis by an angle that
increases over time. This gives the effect of the cube of points spinning. Second, rotate around the
x (horizontal) axis by a fixed amount. This tilts the cube toward you, so that it looks like you're
looking down on it rather than from the side.

To rotate around the y axis, we multiply `gamepos.xz` by a rotation matrix. This updates the x and
z coordinates, but leaves the y coordinate fixed. To rotate around the x axis, we multiply
`gamepos.yz` by a rotation matrix, which updates y and z but leaves x fixed.

## Functions

The two matrices are created with a call to a function I defined called `R`. Given an angle, it
returns a rotation matrix by that angle:

	mat2 R(float angle) {
		float S = sin(angle), C = cos(angle);
		return mat2(C, S, -S, C);
	}

The body of the function is similar to a JavaScript function, with a `return` value. It uses the
built-in functions `sin` and `cos`, which are the same as JavaScript's `Math.sin` and `Math.cos`.
However, the top line is a bit different. There's no keyword like `function`. Instead you need to
declare the return type (`mat2` in this case), and the `return` value must match this type. There's
a single argument, written as `float angle`. `float` is, of course, the type of the variable
`angle`.

GLSL function arguments, in addition to their type, are also one of `in`, `out`, or `inout`, with
`in` being the default. These specify whether an argument's value gets passed into the function,
gets passed out of the function, or both. If you want to update a variable's value, you can declare
it as an `inout` parameter:

	void double(inout float x) {
		x *= 2;
	}

Now when you call `double(a)`, the value of `a` outside the fuction will actually be doubled. If `a`
were declared as `in`, that wouldn't be the case. `out` is also useful if you need to return more
than one value from a function. But for the most part, `in` is a good default.

## `gl_PointCoord` and `discard`

In order for a point to appear as anything other than a solid square of color, we need different
fragments (aka pixels) in the same point to write different values to `gl_FragColor`. This is
impossible if the only thing we consider are uniforms, because uniforms have the same value for
every fragment in the point. So we need something other than uniforms.

The most common thing for this is shader varyings, which we'll see in lesson XX. But for this lesson
we'll use `gl_PointCoord`. This is a `mediump vec2`, a vector of 2 medium-precision floats, that
gives the (x,y) coordinate over the surface of the point. It ranges from (0, 0) in the upper left of
the point to (1, 1) in the lower right of the point. (Note that y = 0 on top, not bottom, in this
case. Usually it's the other way.)

Now, if we want to make the point into a sphere, we need to determine whether the fragment falls
within a circle centered on the center of the point. To make the math simpler, let's start by
transforming `gl_PointCoord` into a different coordinate system, with a vector I'll call `p`. This
vector ranges from (-1, -1) on the lower left of the point to (1, 1) on the upper right of the
point.

Now the circle in question is the unit circle, the formula for which is `p.x^2 + p.y^2 = 1`. We can
also use the handy built-in function `length`, in which case the formula is `length(p) = 1`. If the
fragment falls outside this circle, we don't want to assign it any color. We could accomplish this
by setting `gl_FragColor.a` to `0.0`, so the fragment will be completely transparent (assuming
appropriate blending settings). The better way is with the `discard` keyword:

	if (length(p) > 1.0) discard;

`discard` means that this fragment will not appear with any color, nor will it affect the depth
buffer, regardless of any depth or blending settings, and regardless of any value that has been
assigned to `gl_FragColor`. This is exactly what we want.

And just like that, we've got a circle.

## Exercises

1. Change the vertex shader so that the cube rotates vertically rather than horizontally.
1. Change the line that involves rotation around the vertical axis to
`gamepos.xz *= R(rotation * float(index.y));`. This means that the amount a point is rotated around
the vertical axis depends on its y-coordinate. What do you expect it to look like?
1. Put a round hole in the middle of each point. Hint: you can do this by `discard`ing when
`length(p)` is small enough.
1. Put a square hole in the middle of each point. Hint: use the `abs` function on `p.x` and `p.y`.
1. Rewrite the fragment shader so that it still produces round points, but without the `discard`
keyword. You'll need to also enable blending for it to work.
1. Add the following line to the fragment shader, after the definition of `color`:
`color *= 0.5 + 0.4 * sin(3.0 * radians(rotation) + float(index.y));` This causes points to be
brighter or darker depending on the time and their y-coordinate. In order to get this to work,
you'll need to define `rotation` as a uniform variable in the fragment shader, as well as the vertex
shader. Remember that the precision has to match, and the default precision in the fragment shader
is `mediump`.
