# Lesson 07

This lesson puts some finishing touches on the scene we built in Lessons 05 and 06.

## Loops

To finish up our coverage of GLSL, I'm just going to mention loops. `for` loops exist in GLSL, but
like arrays, they're much more restricted in their usage than JavaScript `for` loops. The most
common form of a `for` loop is fine:

	for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {

But there are a bunch of things you can't do, such as set or update `i` within the body of the loop.
Basically, the compiler needs to be able to easily determine how many times the loop will run. When
`for` loops are allowed, `break` and `continue` work like in JavaScript.

`while` and `do` loops are not supported.

You might be wondering how it's possible to make complicated 3D scenes with many objects if you
can't even use something as simple as `while` loops in the shaders. The whole idea behind the shader
pipeline is that the main things you would want to iterate over have already been broken out and
parallelized. In some sense, you can think of what goes in the shader as the inner body of a loop
already. The rest of the WebGL state determines how the iteration occurs. If that's not reassuring,
just trust that you'll get the hang of it eventually.

## Perspective transformation

Our scene looks pretty 3d, but it could look much better. For one thing, points don't get larger
when they're closer to the camera. The general topic of perspective is very complicated, and linear
algebra really comes in handy here. We're just going to do something simple.

The perspective transformation involves changing the position and the size of the points, so as you
may guess, this belongs in the vertex shader.

If you remember in the vertex shader, we've got something that expresses how far something is from
the viewer: `clippos.z`. This is equal to `-1.0` at the nearest point that's visible, and equal to
`1.0` at the farthest point that's visible.

We need the points to appear larger when `clippos.z` is small, and smaller when it's large. Here's
how the perspective transformation accomplishes this:

	float pfactor = 1.0 + 0.7 * clippos.z;
	gl_PointSize = pointsize / pfactor;

`pfactor` is always positive, and increases with increasing `clippos.z`. So if we divide by it,
it will give us the effect we want.

We adjusted the size of the points, but we also need to adjust the spacing between the points. We
can accomplish this by dividing `gl_Position` by the same factor:

	gl_Position.xyz /= pfactor;

(If you know homogeneous coordinates, you know that you can alternately say
`gl_Position.w *= pfactor`. But if you don't, don't worry about it.)

## Lighting

Let's see this shader actually do some shading. Lighting is an enormous topic, with many physical
models and equations that are used to replicate many different kinds of real-world lighting. We're
going to make the simplest possible lighting setup. We want light to come from above (the positive
y axis). To accomplish this, fragments near the top of the point will be brighter (larger color
values), and fragments near the bottom of the point will be darker (smaller color values). Let's
make a value called `shade` that's larger at the top and smaller at the bottom, which will then be
multiplied into `color`.

	float shade = 0.5 + 0.6 * p.y;
	shade = clamp(shade, 0.0, 1.0);
	color *= shade;

Here we're using `p.y`, defined in the last lesson, that goes from -1 at the bottom of the point to
1 at the top of the point. I just chose the values `0.5` and `0.6` because I thought they looked
nice. Generally we just want `shade` to vary roughly between `0.0` and `1.0`. The `clamp` line
assures that it remains within that range.

## `gl_FragCoord`

While we're in the fragment shader, let's add a couple more effects, just because we can.

Like `gl_PointCoord`, `gl_FragCoord` is a global value available to the fragment shader that varies
between fragments. It's a `mediump vec4` that gives this fragment's position in the viewport.
`gl_FragCoord.xy` is in units of pixels. For instance, if the viewport is 854x480 pixels, then
`gl_FragCoord.x` varies from 0 on the left edge of the viewport, to 854 on the right edge.
`gl_FragCoord.y` varies from 0 on the bottom edge, to 480 on the top. `gl_FragCoord.z` indicates the
fragment's depth, and it is not measured in pixels. Its range is 0 (closest to the viewer) up to 1
(farthest from the viewer), regardless of viewport size.

Many things you might think to do with `gl_FragCoord` can be better done with shader varyings, which
we'll cover in later lessons. But here we use it for two special effects.

First, we use `gl_FragCoord.z` to make things farther from the viewer appear darker, by multiplying
`color` by a value that depends on `gl_FragCoord.z`. (It's a bit subtle, but good effects often
are.) This was a common technique in older video games known as distance fog. Because you could only
render out to a limited distance, by default objects would suddenly appear and disappear as they
passed the distance barrier at `gl_FragCoord.z = 1.0`. So you smoothly blend the object's color into
the background color as it gets farther away, to make the transition less sudden. At any rate, this
is as simple as:

	color *= 1.0 - gl_FragCoord.z;

Second, we use `gl_FragCoord.xy` to make a circle of inverted colors centered on the mouse cursor.
We pass in the mouse position from JavaScript as a uniform called `mpos`, and use the built-in
`distance` function to invert the color if this fragment's `gl_FragCoord.xy` is within 100 pixels of
`mpos`.

	if (distance(gl_FragCoord.xy, mpos) < 100.0) {
		color = 1.0 - color;
	}

Looks pretty good I think! If you look over the shader and see all the effects we added with not
too much code, hopefully you get a sense for how powerful GLSL can be.

## Exercises

1. Change the `0.7` in the definition of `pfactor` to other different values, and see which one you
like best. You can even try negative numbers if you want to see some strange perspectives.
1. Change the position of the light source. Instead of the scene being lit from the top, make it lit
from the left.
1. Change the definition of `shade` to `0.5 + dot(p, vec2(0.3, 0.5))`. Where do you think the light
will appear to come from?
1. Disable depth testing. What do you think will happen?
1. Change the line that updates `color` based on `gl_FragCoord.z` to this:
`color = mix(color, background, gl_FragCoord.z);` This lets you fade out `color` to any background
color you want instead of just black. Try setting `background` to blue (`vec3(0.0, 0.0, 1.0)`).
Also update the `gl.clearColor` line in the JavaScript so that the background color actually is
blue.
1. Make it so that not every point gets the negative filter applied to it. Only apply the negative
filter if `mod(float(index.y), 2.0) == 0.0`, to get every other layer.
1. Change the definition of `shade` in the fragment shader to `0.5 + 0.6 * cos(10.0 * p.y);`
Try out some of the other built-in function other than `cos` and see if you can make any other weird
lighting effects.

