## Lesson 09

* [Download the HTML file for this lesson](/lessons/09.html?raw=true)
* [Previous lesson](/lessons/10.md)
* [Next lesson](/lessons/08.md)
* [Back to lesson listing](/lessons/README.md)

Now we'll see the options

## Sampling

In 2d graphics, you often draw an image the exact size it'll appear on the screen, with one pixel in
the image corresponding to one pixel on the screen. This is not always the case, though, since you
may want to scale an image up or down, or rotate it. It's not the case especially often in 3d
graphics, where things need to be larger or smaller depending on their distance.

So how do you determine what pixel goes where when the pixels in the source texture don't match up
one-to-one with the pixels in the viewport? There are two basic options available in WebGL: nearest
and linear. Basically, nearest means you take the color of the single pixel that's closest to the
given point, and linear means you combine the colors of the four pixels that the point falls
between, using an average weighted by how close each pixel is to the point. Nearest tends to result
in sharper images, and linear tends to result in smoother lines.

## Min and mag filters

There are two different filter settings that apply here. The minification filter applies when you're
zoomed out, when the image appears smaller in the viewport than the source texture. The
magnification filter applies when you're zoomed in, when the image appears larger in the viweport
than the source texture. These settings can be set independently:

	gl.texParameteri(gl.TEXTURE_2D, gl.TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER, gl.LINEAR)
	gl.texParameteri(gl.TEXTURE_2D, gl.TEXTURE_MAG_FILTER, gl.NEAREST)

The texture that these settings applies to is the texture bound to the currently active texture
unit, which we covered in Lesson 08.

## Mipmaps

There's an additional complication with minification (zoomed out). Essentially, if a single pixel on
the viewport covers many pixels of the texture, you want sampling to produce an average of all the
texture pixels covered by that viewport pixel. In the extreme case, zoomed out to the point where an
entire texture falls within a single pixel, you'd like to take an average of all the pixels within
the texture.

Of course, looking up 256x256 pixels and taking an average is way too much calculation to do in
real time. Mipmaps are a clever solution that lets you get an approximate value without ever having
to look up more than a few pixels.

A mipmap is a set of progressively smaller copies of an image, each one smaller by a factor of 2. If
a texture is 64x64, then its mipmaps are 32x32, 16x16, 8x8, 4x4, 2x2, and 1x1. In each case, each
pixel in the mipmap is an average of 4 pixels in the image before it. When it comes time to sample
from the texture, if you're zoomed out by a factor of 4, you sample from the mipmap 2 levels down
(16x16 in the above example). Mipmaps need to be generated once before they can be used. If you're
going to use mipmaps, you need to call this after loading the image data into the texture:

	gl.generateMipmap(gl.TEXTURE_2D)

With mipmaps, there are a few minification options. `gl.LINEAR_MIPMAP_NEAREST` will choose the
nearest mipmap to the current zoom level, and sample by taking the linear average of the 4 closest
pixels within that mipmap (like `gl.LINEAR`). This is the default option and it's pretty good. There
is one option that's even smoother, `gl.LINEAR_MIPMAP_LINEAR`, which chooses the two nearest mipmaps
to sample from, takes a linear average within each one one, and then takes a linear average between
the two averages. The downside is that it requires reading 8 pixels instead of 4 and doing more
calculation. And of course there's `gl.NEAREST_MIPMAP_NEAREST` and `gl.NEAREST_MIPMAP_LINEAR`.

Generally, mipmaps just work, so you don't need to worry about which mipmap is being sampled at
which zoom level - WebGL handles it the way you want. But it's possible to have some control over
which mipmap gets sampled if you really want it. Within the shader, you can use `texture2DLod` to
sample with a specified level of detail instead of `texture2D`. This is rarely used, but I just
wanted to mention it.

## Wrap parameters

So now we know how the texture will be sampled for every possible position, no matter where it is on
the grid. But what if it's outside the grid? The texture image is mapped to texture coordinates
running over the unit square, from (0, 0) to (1, 1), so what happens if you sample the texture at
coordinates (2, -0.3)? This is where wrap parameters come in.

It's never just blank outside the unit square. You always sample from some point in the texture.
There are three options. `gl.REPEAT` will tile the texture over and over. `gl.MIRRORED_REPEAT` will
also tile it, but flip it each time it does, as if you placed mirrors at the edges of the unit
square. `gl.CLAMP_TO_EDGE` will extend the edges out to infinity. `gl.REPEAT` is the default.

You can set the horizontal (S) and vertical (T) wrap parameters independently. (Texture coordinates
are often called s and t instead of x and y. I don't find the distinction to be very useful; I just
go with x and y.)

	gl.texParameteri(gl.TEXTURE_2D, gl.TEXTURE_WRAP_S, gl.REPEAT)
	gl.texParameteri(gl.TEXTURE_2D, gl.TEXTURE_WRAP_T, gl.CLAMP_TO_EDGE)

## Texture dimensions

Unlike the viewport, textures cannot necessarily be any size. Both mipmaps and wrapping algorithms
rely on the fact that the texture width and height are powers of 2 (16, 32, 64, 128, 256, etc.).
However, sometimes you don't care about that. For instance if you just want to draw an image to the
screen pixel for pixel, without sampling. So, you can make a non-power-of-2 (NPOT) texture if the
following conditions are met:

1. The minification filter is set to `gl.NEAREST` or `gl.LINEAR`.
1. The horizontal and vertical wrap are both set to `gl.CLAMP_TO_EDGE`.
1. `gl.generateMipmap` is not called on the texture.

## Getters used in this lesson

	// GLenum: current texture setting for the texture in the currently active unit
	gl.getTexParameter(gl.TEXTURE_2D, gl.TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER)
	gl.getTexParameter(gl.TEXTURE_2D, gl.TEXTURE_MAG_FILTER)
	gl.getTexParameter(gl.TEXTURE_2D, gl.TEXTURE_WRAP_S)
	gl.getTexParameter(gl.TEXTURE_2D, gl.TEXTURE_WRAP_T)

## Exercises

1. Decide which of the six minification options and which of the two magnification options you think
are best. Then change the `if (false)` line to `true`, to fill the texture with a smoother image.
Reload the page and see if your opinion of the options is any different.
1. Change the wrap settings to produce a texture rendering like this image. (You'll need to change
the `drawextended` function so that horizontal and vertical wrap settings are not necessarily the
same.)
1. Add the following lines after `gl.generateMipmap`. This will load a solid blue image into the
texture, but it won't update the mipmaps. Reload the page and explain what you see:

	imgcontext.fillStyle = "blue"
	imgcontext.fillRect(0, 0, 64, 64)
	gl.texImage2D(gl.TEXTURE_2D, 0, gl.RGBA, gl.RGBA, gl.UNSIGNED_BYTE, imgcontext.canvas)

