# Lesson 10

## Drawing with lines

There are three kinds of WebGL primitive shapes: points, lines, and triangles. We've already seen a
lot of fancy things that can be done with points, and triangles are used for all that and more.
Lines, on the other hand, don't get a lot of use. One big problem with them is they don't scale into
the distance, so they can look strange incorporated into a 3D scene. Still, they can be useful for
UI elements, special effects, and 2D scenes.

Setting up the vertex and fragment shaders, and their uniforms and attributes, is pretty much the
same for lines as it is for points. To draw lines, when it comes time to issue the `gl.drawArrays`
command, instead of using `gl.POINTS` for the first argument, you use one of `gl.LINES`,
`gl.LINE_STRIP`, or `gl.LINE_LOOP`.

	gl.drawArrays(gl.LINES, 0, 100)

If this had been called for `gl.POINTS`, 100 points would have been drawn, so how many lines are
drawn here? It helps to remember that the third argument (100 in this case) is always the number of
vertex shader instances that run, or alternately the number of vertex attribute values that are read
from their corresponding buffers.

So 100 vertex shader instances run, but how many lines does that make? For `gl.LINES`, it's 50. Each
of the 50 pairs of vertex shader runs will generate a position on the viewport, and then these two
points will be connected with a straight line. Every pixel that falls on that line will run through
the fragment shader, like with points. Depth testing, alpha transparency, and blending, all happen
the same as before after the fragment shader.



## Line width

There's nothing in the vertex shader like `gl_PointSize` to set the size of lines, but you can set
the line width in pixels from JavaScript:

	gl.lineWidth(2)

The default is 1 pixel. Non-integer line widths are not supported. The minimum is 1 and the maximum
might be fairly low (around 10). There may or may not be support for antialiased lines, which look
better diagonal than aliased lines.

The line width is a context-level setting. It remains the same even if you change WebGL programs.


