
With the various options available, there are an enormous number of ways you can construct
complicated objects. You can potentially do any combination of points, lines, and triangles, in
front of, behind, or passing through each other. In practice, there's one technique that is the most
useful when it comes to your normal, solid 3D objects. (Special effects, like smoke and explosions,
and 2D objects, like HUDs, often involve other techniques.)

The standard technique involves first identifying the outer surface of your object, a single surface
with no gaps. This surface must be a polyhedron, so rounded edges need to be eliminated at this
point. Break up each polygonal face of the surface into triangles. Then, draw them all using
`gl.TRIANGLES`.

If you're using this standard technique, there's a handy optimization you can do. Naturally, not
every face that makes up your surface is going to be visible to the camera. The ones that are
invisible will eventually be covered over by one or more other triangles, so if you could avoid
drawing them at all in the first place, you could speed things up. WebGL gives you the ability to
cull (select for removal from the drawing step) some of the triangle that are known not be visible.
Specifically, the ones that are facing away from the camera. This is, on average, around half the
triangles in any given surface, so that's a large potential optimization, but there are certain
things you need to keep in mind when you use it.

So what does it mean for a triangle to be facing away from the camera, how does WebGL recognize
this, and how do we know that such triangles can actually be culled safely?

There is no equivalent to face culling when drawing points and lines.


